OKONFO RAO KAWAWA

and

The Jungle Communication Center

in Osogbo / Nigeria

or back to JCC HOMEPAGE
The JCC is located in a forest belt at the border of Osogbo, an ancient, culturally important Yoruba city in the south-west of Nigeria. It was founded by the fetish priest, medicineman, drummer, dancer and poet OKONFO RAO KAWAWA.

The JCC wishes to support the communication and the naturality on spiritual level, through prayers, drumming, dancing and handwork.All those who are interested in body and spirit are heartily welcome.

OKONFO RAO KAWAWA


AUTOBIOGRAPHY
Let me first explain my name: "OKONFO" is the Ashanti word for "Priest". Therefore "OKONFO" is not a name but a traditional title, which I got after my initiation as an Akompriest, in Ghana. " RAO " is the acronym of my official name - R = Rashidi, A = Ajani, O = Omoniyi. While Kawawa is my nickname.
I was born on 2nd of May 1949 in Akim Nkwanta, Ghana. My parents were Nigerians from Osogbo. My father, late Pa Salami Idikan Ominiyi hails from Asubiaro family and my mother, late Rafatu Diekola originates from the royal family of Matanmi in Oke Bale.
In my childhood I was strongly attracted by the powerful expressions which I experienced whith traditional worshippers in Ghana. My parents wouldn't accept this. They were Muslims and tried to force me to follow their religious line. But they worked to no purpose and I insisted in associating with the medicinemen in our environment. That caused a lot of trouble for me in the family and I often got sound thrashings.

Therefore I was happy, when I got the opportunity to leave my parents to live with relatives, first in Cape Coast and later in Accra.

After my primary and middle school education, I went through apprenticeship as mechanic welder and sprayer. In 1969, the deportation law with forced foreigners to leave Ghana, caused my resettlement to Osogbo. Thereafter, a hard time followed, not only for me but also for many of the resettlers. At this period I worked as a coalpot maker, boxer and firewoodseller. Whilst my parents planned to find a wife for me, I went back into apprenticeship as welder to avoid early marriage.

In 1971, I had a dream which foretold my journey and stay in Germany. My family couldn't imagine that this dream could become a reality. But soon after my second dream foretelling my visit in Asubiaro family, after my stay in Germany, accompagnied by my German wife and setting up a centre on our farm, I received a letter and a ticket from an uncle of mine inviting me to Hamburg, Germany. Arriving there, I continued my apprenticeship and studied German language in private schools before proceeding to the university of Kiel. I was also working at opera-house and theatre in Kiel, besides jobs done in different firms. Gradually I started drumming and dancing again, performing with different people and musical groups.

Later I discovered that I had to follow the traditional line without compromise. I felt I have to be initiated into Akom, in order to work freely under the blessing of the ancestors. I decided to return to Nigeria along with my German wife, Gruma. My family disliked my decision to become a fetishpriest, but I stood my ground, some weeks later I went to Ghana. There I met Nsuma Kwahene, the head of Akompriests in Kumasi, who sent me to Atimatim for initiation. I stayed there for half a year with Okonfo Kusi, after which, the BONINKA fetish pot was handed over to me. Since then till date my duty has been to carry out this symbol once a year and I have been doing this in my annual BONINKA harvest-festival in October.

Back to Germany, I planned to set up a centre for African culture, and in 1981 I founded "Afrika-Haus" in Essen, which I led for five years. During this period, I had a lot of students whom I trained in African music, dance and ancient philosophy. I had performances, held workshops and taught also in Italy and Spain at conferences.

In summer 1986, I decided to return back to Osogbo together with my two wives (Gruma and Iyalode) and our three children (Bakoaa, Kola and Iyabo). We made the journey from Germany through Switzerland, Italy, Tunisia, Algeria and Niger to Nigeria with 9 adults (Germans) and four children in two trucks. We arrived at Osogbo at the beginning of Osun festival. After settling in the town in a small two room apartment, my students returned to Germany. Thereafter hard time followed. We had serious health problems and Gruma, my first German wife, died on 11.11.86. That was a great shock to all of us, but we had to bear it and to adopt ourselves to circumstances.

After one year, we moved to Oke Eleyele Farm, which is now known as JCC, where we lived in our truck in default of a dwelling-house. In March 1988, we started the construction of our residence and later on we were able to gradually complete the building, laid the foundation and erected "Diekola Memorial Hall". On 3rd of February 1994 the entire members of the Association of Yoruba Students of the Obafemi Awolowo University Ile-Ife bestowed on my honorary title of BALOGUN ASA (Chief of Culture).

Osogbo Progressive Union (O.P.U.) also gave me an award through the royal father, the Ataoja-Iyiola Oyewale Matanmi III.

In 1989 I made my first musical tour in Germany, together with my wife Iyalode, the children and three Ghananians. In 1991 another tour followed, with performances in Germany and Japan. In Tokyo I played with two of my students on the world biggest drum, carved by my students in Trier and sold to a Japanese customer. In 1993 and 1995, I toured again with my family and Engel M. Koch, my student who leads "Akom la Engel", our German Contact Centre. These tours, I deeply enjoyed and we are looking forward for the 1997 tour.

Finally I have two books published in German language, "Der Böse Geist" and "Ajani". Moreover I released the LP "Orobinioyo" and the cassettes "Musical Experiment" and "Okonfo Rao Kawawa mit Akomfamilie"which also is released as CD.

back to JCC HOMEPAGE or back to the top of this page

JCC - Legacy of the future

What is in a name? There are a lot that is a name. It is the physical and spiritual. It is the reflection of deepness of giver and bearer of such name.JUNGLE COMMUNICATION CENTRE is not just a name. It did not just come from the blues. The name emerged from the deep imagination of multi-talented Okonfo Rao Kawawa who hails from Asubiaro family of Osogbo.
Some people quickly conclude that the name - Jungle Communication Centre - is abusing the african personality. While others see it as the product of the rich thought of a fertile mind. When Okonfo departed from Germany after15 years sojourn, it was with a determined hope and vision to set up a Centre for the research, preservation and promotion of African arts, culture, music and dance, combining with international foreign culture where new ideas will emerge for the development of mankind.

Arriving Nigeria in1986, Okonfo and his group of German students, including his wives and children lived in his Asubiaro Family House in Isale Osun.As a result of various problems put on the path of his progress, Okonfo moved out of his family base and rented a two room apartment in the same area which soon attracted the attention of all and sundry.With a determination to find a peaceful environment, where nature prominent, Okonfo moved into Oke Eleyele Farm where his extended family had a large expance of untilled land. Right inside the jungle of farms, they cleared some parts and settled. The new found home was thus named Jungle Communication Centre.

However, the name "Jungle Communication Centre" had been conceived and decided through prayers, invocation and libation pouring before leaving Germany. The decision to move into the Jungle immediatly on arriving Osogbo, was made impossible by Okonfos family who saw it as a crazy idea. They said, the idea is not benefitting a prince, for Okonfo is from a royal family of Osogbo.

It was the death of Okonfo's first wife, a German, that accelerated the movement into the jungle, apart from various other problems.There was no house in the Jungle. Okonfo and his family slept in truck and later built thatched huts. Today it is something different. This is where Okonfo calls Jungle Communication Centre. Here, he found peace for his soul, though life was very different at the beginning. JCC is located in a forest belt, where the music of the swinging palm trees, birds, rats, monkeys intermarry with big banana plants.JCC consists of a big hall named ,

Photo of Diekola Memorial Hall
Diekola Memorial Hall after Okonfos late mother. The hall itself is surrounded by offices and shops for various vocations like tailoring, for musical instruments, batiks and crafts. There is also a carpentary workshop, and near it is the Ile Orisa Shrine where the symbol of Boninka, Okonfo's personal God reigns supreme.Besides, a modern story building now stands in the centre, serving as abode for Okonfo family, his students, with guest rooms for visitors and tourists.
Running almost parallel and surrounding part of the centre, is the Ilekunkun stream that provided source of drinking water to Okonfo's ancestors when they hid themselves during the slave trade expedition in Africa. Okonfo's children are already stepping into the shoes of their father, musically and artistically. Their performance on stage is quite thrilling and invigorating. The only girl among them - Iyabo - has shown evidence of a good dancer, with her mesmerizing dance steps and act while the older two boys' - Bakoaa and Kola - dexterity on virtually all musical instruments cannot be questioned. The wife, Iyalode had stood behind Okonfo as a Rock of Gibraltar. Besides her performance on stage which is quite inspiring and unique, her ability to coordinate the administrative set of JCC is quite commendable.

Most significant aspect of JCC is the array of young boys and girls who inhabit the place as students, learning the various vocations, while at the same time, Okonfo sponsors and finances their educational pursuits at the public schools.The Jungle Communication Centre is not only a cultural cum tourist centre, it is an institution whose legacy has received attention world-wide.

 
 back to JCC HOMEPAGE or back to the top of this page
